# Munasinghe and Brandvain 2024 (In Revision). Together Inbreeding and Reproductive Compensation Favor Lethal *t*-Haplotypes

Here, we consider the evolution of the *t*-haplotype in house mouse and related species of *Mus*. The *t*-haplotype is a seminal example of a segregation distorter. The *t*-haplotype segregates normally in females but manipulates spermatogenesis post meiosis such that the *t*-haplotype is transmitted to offspring >50% in males. Curiously, a majority of the well-characterized *t*-haplotypes carry a recessive lethal mutation. These lethal *t*-haplotypes induce early embryonic lethality in all homozygous individuals. Previous work has shown that *t*-haplotype frequency can vary substantially between populations and that sometimes lethal haplotypes can be more comman than the male-sterile haplotype. Given that lethality of the *t*-haplotype is not a physiological necessity of the system, the question of its existence and the observation of its high frequency has long perplexed evolutionary biologists.

** Here, we expand on Charlesworth's (1994) adaptive model for the evolution lethal *t*-haplotypes**. Early embryonic elimination of lethals may improve the survival of remaining offspring, increase the duration of reproductive life for mothers by reducing litter size, or simply have minimal effect on female fecundity becomes more embryos are implanated than come to term. Charlesworth coined this effect 'reproductive compensation' and showed how it could facilitate the invasion of a lethal haplotype into a poulation jointly polymorphic for a wild-type and male-sterile haplotype. However, this requires highly favorable invasion parameters that exceed values that have been observed in natural and experimental populations. 

We consider how inbreeding via sib-mating in conjunction with reproductive compensation influences lethal *t*-haplotype evolution. We consider a one-locus, three allele model representing the wild type, male-sterile, and lethal *t*-haplotype. First, we explore the evolution of the male-sterile t-haplotype to determine when it can invade a naïve population and how inbreeding impacts the final equilibrium frequency. If a stable polymorphism for the male-sterile t-haplotype is achievable, we then introduce a lethal t-haplotype into the population. We evaluate the influence of reproductive compensation and inbreeding interact on the invasion dynamics for the lethal t-haplotype. Notably, we are interested in when the lethal t-haplotype displaces, or reaches a higher frequency than, the male-sterile haplotype and whether final equilibrium frequencies are closer to those observed in natural populations, as previous models have struggled to match empirical observations.

## Models

This repository contains the code for our 4 distinct models. Models 1 and 2 track the evolution of a male-sterile *t*-hapltoype into a naive population with and without the probability of brother-sister  mating respectively. Models 3 and 4 extend the prior framework by introducing a male-sterile *t*-haplotype into naive population and then, if a stable polymorphism can be obtained, introducing the lethal *t*-haplotype. 

Each folder contains the code for that relevant model. All functions used across our models can be found in the T_Haplotype_Funcions.R file. For additional details on model construction, we refer individuals to our manuscript.

